---
layout: post
title:  Consumer V. Producer
date:   2015-08-23 15:02:50
categories: blog
tags:
- productivity
- discipline
- mindset
---
Lately I’ve been spending a lot of time examining my day-to-day life. In a manner similar to tracking finances or
counting calories, I examined just where all this supposed free time I was supposed to be having was going. I found
that nearly 75% of my free time on weekdays was being spent on playing video games, watching television, and browsing
the internet. It seems like a standard use of time for a young adult living in a technologically connected world, but
when extrapolated out for a decade or two was sobering. Did I really want to spend 15,000 hours of the next twenty
years of my life playing *League of Legends* and *Hearthstone*, or watching and re-watching old sitcoms?

Even recognizing the excess of time I’ve invested into playing *League*, I don’t regret playing it. It’s an great game,
and I’ve spent a lot of fun nights playing with friends. But looking at the time I spent playing, the reason I’m
concerned is how perfectly I hit the sweet spot of obsession while not reaching marketable talent.

According to a couple different sites, I’ve invested around 1,500 hours of game time over about four years. I played
frequently — to the point where my non-gaming friends would get annoyed — but I didn’t play enough to really reach a
point where I could use my acquired skill to make something productive out of playing. Now I sit at my desk, wondering
what I could have accomplished if I had spent those 1,500 hours on something tangible. I’m sure I could apply the same
principles to the various television shows I’ve binged over the past couple years of Netflix addiction.

This isn’t to say that consuming content is inherently bad. Quite the opposite. To me, being a content consumer and
content producer are symbiotic. One cannot exist without the other. Even in a perfect, disciplined world where I spend
my entire day writing prolifically, I’d be so disconnected from the real world that I couldn’t produce anything of real
value to society. And obviously, if I spent my life merely consuming content, I wouldn’t have an output to share
whatever insights I gained.

While consuming content is integral to putting others’ thoughts, feelings, and actions in context, I feel like today’s
culture has produced a system of consuming anything and everything without thought or concern about its content. The
average American today watches over 36 hours of television a week, according to the [Nielsen Q1 2015 Total Audience Report](http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2015/the-total-audience-report-q1-2015.html).
Extrapolated over, say, 40 years, that adds up to an astounding 75,000 hours of television. While there are certainly
a large number of good television shows based on whatever criteria you want, it seems bold to suggest that the 75,000
hours invested into television over the course of 40 years is nearly as productive as learning a new hobby, or starting
a business.

This is not to suggest that video games, television, or movies are worthless. I enjoy the time I spend consuming them.
Even more than that, they offer a mechanism to help me relate to other people’s experiences and ways of thought. If all
I did was try to improve myself without ever exposing myself to others’ content, I would have no basis for
understanding improvement. All improvement would be absolutely blind self-improvement, without any knowledge of whether
or not it was actually relevant or helpful. It is important to actually grasp this beneficial aspect of consumption,
that consumption helps ground you as a person, and not just consume for a getaway from your life.

Consumption is only a negative *when it is the only method of interacting with content*. Not because it’s worthless, but
rather because there are far better options. For me, better options includes writing blog articles and short stories,
thinking about new ideas to improve the world, and trying to learn a musical instrument. But yours might be different,
and in fact should be what you want them to be. The danger of nearly exclusive consumption, to me, are illustrated
beautifully by the concept of opportunity cost. Opportunity cost says that, when faced with several mutually exclusive
decisions, the cost of choosing one over the other is not only the cost of that choice, but also the missed opportunity
of having chosen the other.

With a stellar game like *Bastion*, the ten hours invested into it are worthwhile in exchange for the lost time I could
spend on other projects that live in the producer realm. Likewise, with movies like *Mad Max: Fury Road* and *Birdman*, I
don’t view the time invested into watching them as negatively. Compare these to *Fallout Shelter*, a tower sim mobile
game. While well executed, the game has no real goal beyond growing the vault, ultimately something that won’t bring
much happiness at all, even through a large period of investment.

So what is good consumption, and what separates it from bad consumption? Good consumption is something that opens eyes
to a new viewpoint, that educates the consumer, that offers something applicable as a matter of improvement. Anything
that offers one or more of these things is an excellent use of time. Self-help books are an obvious choice, but also
helps to illuminate the peril of constant consumption. Reading dozens of self-help books will certainly give you
insights on how to be a better X, but without the effort of putting them into practice, they are effectively useless,
wasting the time invested in them.

Good consumption also depends on your personal goals in life. If you aspire to be a professional writer, then reading
literary magazines and pieces in your target genre would be an excellent use of time. For an aspiring filmmaker,
movies and relevant books would be a great choice. Whatever your goals, it is imperative to take stock and recognize
how you can spend your time to further your purpose in life.

So, having recognized I have an excess of consumption, what’s the next step? The answer is simple, though following
through is not. Production is the polar opposite to consumption. I classify classify production as the act of creating
anything new to the world. What form will this take? I’m still trying to figure it out, spending all the time I’d
otherwise consume by experimenting. I’ll see what I enjoy the most and what I am the most successful with, and iterate
on that to reach the best decision about what to do. No matter what, I aim to have fun with it. Producing should make
you feel better about how you spend your time, but it shouldn’t make you unhappier.

So if happiness is the goal, is it worth creating music and posting it on Soundcloud, where your listeners consist of
your best friends and your technically-inclined grandma? Is it worth writing a blog that no one ever reads? Absolutely.
Because even if right now, nothing is taking hold, if you feel talentless, you are using your mind in new ways,
creating new neural pathways. In time, with practice, everything improves. In a year from now, you’ll look back on what
you created today and laugh, because of how inept it looks. You’re able to recognize this, because you’ve improved
astronomically. The iterative process is an astounding thing. Malcolm Gladwell, in his book *Outliers*, explains a
highly debated theory about talent. To achieve true mastery of something, you must invest 10,000 hours into it.
Extrapolating off the earlier number of 75,000 hours over 40 years of watching television, it would take only five
hours a week of producing instead of consuming to turn you into a master.

Even better, with the advent of the internet and the 21st century, it has never been easier to produce. 30 years ago,
no one would imagine writing essays explaining their point of view on and mailing them out to strangers. With blogs,
sites like Medium and Tumblr, you can create content and share it with your friends, and like a virus they’ll share it
out too, reaching far more people than you would have ever thought. Garage Band offers a way for aspiring musicians to
create their own music, and Soundcloud and Bandcamp offer ways to show off and even monetize their songs. Amazon has
opened up the self-publishing market to incredible new heights, offering amateur authors a way to put their stories
out at a reasonable price to the Kindle Store. The only barrier to producing content is the one you build up yourself.

Granted, there is a lot of pressure to consume heaps of cheaply accessible content. But are you really missing out on
much by not seeing the newest episode of Pawn Stars? Or seeing a third movie at the theaters within the same week?
Wouldn’t you get much more satisfaction by writing a new song, one that you can share with friends? Or perhaps writing
and submitting a new short story to a literary magazine appeals more to you. No matter what output your creativity
takes, don’t spend too much time idly enjoying other people’s creations. Stop being a mere consumer and produce your
own contribution to humanity. Someone has to create the Next Big Thing, so why not try and create constantly? Hope
that something you produce will stick, and seize that opportunity to build a foothold in the cultural strata. Don’t
just be a consumer, be a producer. I know I will be.